# Gas-price-time-series

Gas prices have been increasing over the past few decades in the United States. Current gas prices have hit the highest average price per gallon in the nation’s history. The cost per gallon of gas continues to reach all-time highs. Our team decided to dive into the “U.S. Regular All Formulations Retail Gasoline Prices” dataset from February 1991 to March 2022. Grabbing the monthly dataset “U.S. Regular All Formula Retail Gasoline Prices”, we were able to analyze historical trends and temporary and permanent seasonality, and forecast future gas prices. To examine the price of gas over the years, the data needed to be stationary have a constant mean. Before studying the data, we had to process the data accordingly to ensure the data was stationary to continue the exercise. The next steps were processed to ensure our results were precise for our analysis. Analyzing the data by month and year allowed our team to examine the current events of why the gas prices were up or down. The fluctuation of gas prices seems to be constantly trending up; however, in some years the prices are slightly higher than others due to economic trends whether it be an economic crisis, interest rates, gasoline demand, or a multitude of other reasons. Comparing the years, we can also see the gas prices fluctuate depending on seasonality. One factor of temporary seasonality is the time of the year, such as summer months seem to be higher than other months because of people going on vacation. However, we observed a few extreme events that changed the price of gas. One being the tragic event in New York City, known as 9/11. Another being the nationwide financial crisis back in 2008 and the most current event being COVID-19. In our report, our analysis found these events to have a temporary or permanent seasonality that changed the gas prices base. In other words, we found all three factors to be intervention events. All three events either showed a positive or negative significant effect after each crisis. We considered these events in comparing our prediction analysis. Therefore, in order to predict the next five months we needed to take into account these other factors.

It is important to analyze the data and provide predictions because businesses need to understand the problems they are facing. By analyzing the oil industry's historical data, predictive analytics helps companies or consumers make better decisions. Predictive forecasting capability allows everyone to make smarter decisions backed up by facts. Predictive analytics models help increase business productivity, drive effective decision making, predict customer trends or behaviors, and increase revenue. With large amounts of data, going through the process of making the data stationary helps build models to be more effective and have more accurate outcomes.

Overall, our analysis established a well thorough and extensive report covering gas prices. Although we could not draw an accurate conclusion to gas price prediction due to the lack of data for 2022. We concluded that time series regressions performed well with the 95% confidence interval, we were unable to predict the gas prices as accurately as we anticipated. We understand there are many other factors that can change the behavior of gas prices. However, we covered three national crises that heavily impacted the prices. Surprisingly wars did not play a major role in our intervention analysis as we found that only financial crises significantly impacted gas prices. Although there have been a few well known wars throughout the years, especially in the present day, Russia and Ukraine war impact. Unfortunately, our data was limited to complete a deep analysis into this war. On top of that there were other factors that could have caused the fluctuation in gas prices during the same period of the other wars. After discluding the war's impact, our analysis focused on the three intervention events. We found an 89% increase in gas prices after the financial crisis and a 31% increase during COVID-19. Forecasting future gas prices is slightly unpredictable due to unforeseen or unprecedented events that may occur. It is found to be important to analyze the data to help companies make better decisions and consumers make better financial decisions.
